# OOLanguageComparison
## Contributors
* Devun Schmutzler
* Seth vonSeggern

## Languages
* Java 
* C Sharp

### Language Purpose/ Genesis

### Unique Features

### Name Spaces
In C#, namespaces are similar to those in C++. Unlike package names in Java, a namespace is not in any way tied to the location of the source file. While it is not strictly necessary for a Java source file location to mirror its package directory structure, it is the conventional organization.
***
Java uses packages. They are used to organize files or public types to avoid type conflicts. Package constructs can be mapped to a file system.
    
```java 
System.Security.Cryptography.AsymmetricAlgorithm aa; //may be replaced:
import System.Security.Crypography; 
class xxx { ... AsymmetricAlgorithm aa; ... }
```

There is no alias for packages. You have to use import statement or fully-qualified name to mention the specific type.

```java
pacakge N1.N2;
class A {}
class B {}
or
package N1.N2;
class A {}

//another source file
package N1.N2;
class B {}
```
Package cannot be nested. One source file can only have one package statement.

***

C# uses namespaces. They are used to organize programs, both as an "internal" organization system for a program, and as an "external" organization system.
```c#
System.Security.Cryptography.AsymmetricAlgorithm aa; //may be replaced:
using System.Security.Crypography; 
AsymmetricAlgorithm aa;
```
Alternatively, one could specify an alias for the the namespace, eg. :
```c#
using myAlias = System.Security.Crypography; //and then refer to the class with 
myAlias.AsymmetricAlgorithm 
```
Additional Example:
```c#
namespace N1.N2
{
    class A {}
    class B {}
}
or
namespace N1
{
    namespace N2
    {
        class A {}
        class B {}
    }
}
```
### Types
Java supports primitive and reference types. The primitive types are boolean, byte, short, char, int, long, float, and double. Reference types are all classes, including arrays and references. Java does not support creating new value types.

C# supports value and reference types. Reference types include classes, delegate, arrays, and interfaces. Value types include sbyte, byte, short, ushort, int, uint, long, float, double, bool, char, decimal, enum, and structs. Unlike Java, new value types can be defined using structs, i.e.:
```c#
struct Point
{
    public int x, y;
    public Point(int x, int y) {
    this.x = x;
    this.y = y;
    }
}
```
### Classes

### Instance Reference Name in Data Type

The keyword "this" is a Java language keyword that represents the current instance of the class in which it appears. It is used to access class variables and methods.

Since all instance methods are virtual in Java, this can never be null.

```java
public class Point {
    public int x = 0;
    public int y = 0;
        
    //constructor
    public Point(int x, int y) {
        this.x = x;
        this.y = y;
    }
}
```

***

The keyword this in C# works the same way as in Java, for reference types. However, within C# value types, this has quite different semantics, being similar to an ordinary mutable variable reference, and can even occur on the left side of an assignment.

One use of this in C# is to allow reference to an outer field variable within a method that contains a local variable that has the same name. In such a situation, for example, the statement ```c# var n = localAndFieldname;``` within the method will assign the type and value of the local variable localAndFieldname to n, whereas the statement ```c# var n = this.localAndFieldname;``` will assign the type and value of the outer field variable to n.

```c#
class Employee
    {
        private string name;
        private string alias;
        private decimal salary = 3000.00m;

        // Constructor:
        public Employee(string name, string alias)
        {
            // Use this to qualify the fields, name and alias:
            this.name = name;
            this.alias = alias;
        }
    }
```

### Properties

Java does not have property getters and setters built into the language. Instead you must define your own methods to read and write. Therefore there are now backing variables to utilize. As for computed properties, simply by defining our own getter method we have inherently created a computed property that is recalculated ever time we call the method.

```java
public class User {
    private String name;

    public String getName() { return this.name; }
    public void setName(String name) { this.name = name; }
}
```

***
C# however, has built in properties get and set. Recent C# versions also allow "auto-implemented properties" where the backing field for the property is generated by the compiler during compilation. This means that the property must have a setter, however it can be private. However, you can use the notion of backing variables to manipulate what you do when getting or setting a variable, such as a computed property that requires some complex logic.

Example without backing variables:
```c#
public class User {
    public string Name { get; set; }
}
```
Example with backing variables:
```c#
public class User {
    public string Name
    {
        get { return _name; } //this allows you to manipulate what is being returned if you so choose
        set { _name = value; }
    }
}
```



### Interfaces/Protocols

In Java an interface is like a class, and is of a reference type. Interfaces in Java may contain methods, default method implementations, constants, static methods, as well as nested types. Methods in general, should not have concrete implementations, and should be abstract. However, in a new version of Java default implemenations have allowed developers to give methods in an interface a basic implemenation that can be used if one wishes to not implement it themselves. Java allows for a class to implement multiple interfaces at a time. In order for a class to be concrete and instantiable, it must implement all methods that do not have a default implementation.

```java
interface Animal {
   public void eat();
   public void travel();
}
public class MammalInt implements Animal {

   public void eat() {
      System.out.println("Mammal eats");
   }

   public void travel() {
      System.out.println("Mammal travels");
   } 
}
```

***
Interfaces are also a part of C#. Interfaces in C# include properties, methods, indexers and events. Nothing in the interface class can be implemented. Implementation must be left to the class that the interface is being imposed upon. It is important to note that interfaces can't be static and are understood to always be public. There is not limit to the number of interfaces that a single class can implement. 

```c#
interface Car {
    void Drive();
}

public class Nissan : Car {
    public void Drive(){
        //some fancy implementation here that makes the car go fast..
    }
}
```

### Inheritance/Extension

Java allows for classes to inherit from one another. The limitation is that a class can only have one parent class that it inherits from. To inherit from a clas syou must you the ```extends``` keyword after defining the class name. A base class has access to all nonprivate members of the superclass. To talk to the superclass's constructor you must call upon it by using ```super();``` To access superclass methods simple use ```super.baseClassMethod();```.

```java
public class Rectangle {
    public int numberOfSides;
    
    public Rectangle(int NumberOfSides){
        this.numberOfSides = numberOfSides;
    }
}

public class Square extends Rectangle {
    public Square(){
        super(4);
    };
}
```

***
Inheritance in C# is native feature. In it you can simply create a new class, and after having defined its parent class, and use the Subclass : Superclass syntax to show that subclass inherits from superclass. Unlike Java, to reference the superclass's constructor you must you the SublcassConstructor : base() syntax. Here, base references the superclass constructor. This was done with the intention of relieving issues concerning when the superclass constructor should be called (before or after doing work in the subclass constructor), because in C# it is always called before the subclass one. It is also important to note that C# does not support multiple inheritance, but it does allow for extension.

```c#
public class Rectangle {
    public int NumberOfSides;
    
    public Rectangle(int NumberOfSides){
        this.NumberOfSides = NumberOfSides;
    }
}

public class Square : Rectangle {
    public Square() : base(4){};
}
```

### Reflection

Reflection is supported in Java. There are methods in the reflect package that allow you to inspect a class and learn about its class, constructors, methods, fields, as well as many additional pieces of information. It is important to note that relfection can only see public members.

```java
OOIsDead burntToast = new OOIsDead();
Class burntToaster = burntToast.getClass();
```
Here you could have substituted Class and getClass for constructors, methods, or fields.

***

In C# the same is true about reflection. A noteable difference is that C# inspects private and protected members in addition to public ones. 

### Memory Management

### Comparisons of References and Values

### Null/Nil References

Java uses the notion of ```null``` references. A reference is null when it contains no link to memory. Unfortunately Java has no native features to deal with the handling of null references gracefully and cleanly. Instead we must rely upon the knowledge and competence of the developer to check for it. 

```java
String name = null;
String legalName = null;
if(name!=null) {
    legalName = name;
}
else {
    legalName = "John Doe"
}
```

***

C# also uses the term ```null``` to represent the lack of a reference to memory. It is by default the value of all variables that utilize references. Important to note is that types line DateTime and boolean can never be set to null. C# has a way of handling nulls called null propogation. It allows you to use the syntax ```?.``` at the end of an object instead of just ```.```. This checks to see if the object you are referencing first is null or not, and if the first object is null will not try and access its member after which would normally cause and exception. This saves us time using an ```if(something == null){};``` that we all dread. Another feature of C# surrounding nulls is the idea of the null-coalescing operator ```??```. It is a conditional statement that checks for null and allows you to assign another value if the intended one is null.

```c#
String Name = null;
String LegalName = Name ?? "John Doe";
```

### Errors and Exception Handling

### Lambda Expressions, Closures, or Functions as Types

As of Java 8 Lambda Expressions were introduced. The way you implement them is throught he use of functional interfaces. Functional interfaces are those which are denoted with the @FunctionalInterface that contains a single abstract method in it. You can also assign a variable to lamda expressions. Here are two great examples from Dale Musser:

Passing a lambda expression as a parameter:
```java


this.gridPane.widthProperty().addListener((ObservableValue<? extends Number> observable, Number oldValue, final Number newValue) -> {
     drawGrid();
});
```

Assigning a lamba expression to a variable that is passed as a parameter:

```java
ChangeListener<Number> lambdaChangeListener = (ObservableValue<? extends Number> observable, Number oldValue, final Number newValue) -> {
     drawGrid();
};

this.gridPane.widthProperty().addListener(lambdaChangeListener);
```

***

A lambda expression is an anonymous function that is used to create delegates. By using lambda expressions, you can write local functions that can be passed as arguments or returned as the value of function calls. To create a lambda expression, you specify inputs on the left side of the lambda operator ```=>```, and you put the expression on the right. For example, the lambda expression ```x => x * x``` specifies a parameter that’s named x and returns the value of x squared. 

```c#
delegate int del(int i);  
static void Main(string[] args)  
{  
    del myDelegate = x => x * x;  
    int j = myDelegate(5); //j = 25  
}  
```

### Implementation of Listeners and Event Handlers

### Singleton

### Procedural Programming

### Functional Programming

### Multitheading
